Add preconnect and dns-prefetch post (#1222)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/preconnect-and-dns-prefetch/index.md

---

> layout: post

Reviewer: where does `layout: post` come from? I can't find this yaml property in the template or docs

Author: I copied it from one of my earlier posts, it used to be in the example draft I think. Removed it now, it looks like it doesn't make a difference.

Reviewer: My bad it's totally in the handbook https://web.dev/handbook/markup-post-codelab/ sorry

Informing the browser of your intention is as simple as adding a `<link>` tag to your page:

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com">
```

![A diagram showing how the download doesn't start for a while after the connection is established.](preconnect.png)

You can speed up the load time by 100–500 ms by establishing early connections to important third-party origins. These numbers might seem small, but they make a difference in how [users perceive web page performance](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rail#ux).

{% Aside %}
chrome.com [improved Time To Interactive](https://twitter.com/addyosmani/status/1090874825286000640) by almost 1 s by pre-connecting to important origins. An e-commerce website [improved product image load time by 500 ms](https://andydavies.me/blog/2019/03/22/improving-perceived-performance-with-a-link-rel-equals-preconnect-http-header/) by pre-connecting to the image CDN.
{% endAside %}

## Use-cases

> ## Knowing *where from*, but not *what* you're fetching

Reviewer: Should be heading 3? 

```
### Knowing *where from*, but not *what* you're fetching
```

Due to versioned dependencies, you sometimes end up in a situation where you know you'll be requesting a resource from a particular CDN, but not the exact path for it. 

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--center">
<img src="versioned-url.png" style="max-width:450px" alt="A url of a script with the version name.">
<figcaption>An example of a versioned URL</figcaption>
</figure>

> The other common case is loading images from an [image CDN](/image-cdns), where the exact path for an image depends on media queries or runtime feature checks on the user's browser.

Reviewer: broken link, assuming this is because staging or something

Reviewer: nevermind it's because that post is still in a PR

{% endAside %}

You can also initiate a preconnect via the [`Link` HTTP header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Link):

`Link: <https://example.com/>; rel=preconnect`

{% Aside %}
A benefit of specifying a preconnect hint in the HTTP header is that it doesn't rely on markup being parsed and it can be triggered by requests for stylesheets, scripts and more. For example, Google Fonts sends a `Link` header in the stylesheet response in order to pre-connect the domain that hosts the font files.
{% endAside %}

Some types of resources, such as fonts, are loaded in ["anonymous mode"](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-3/#font-fetching-requirements). For those you must set the `crossorigin` attribute with the `preconnect` hint.

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com/ComicSans" crossorigin>
```

If you omit the `crossorigin` attribute, the browser only performs the DNS lookup.

> ## Resolve DNS name early with `rel=dns-prefetch`

Reviewer: I think we would usually say "domain name" instead of DNS name?

---
title: Establish network connections early to improve perceived page speed
subhead: |
    Learn about rel=preconnect and rel=dns-prefetch resource hints and how to use them.
date: 2019-07-30
hero: adams-creation.jpg
alt: Adam's Creation by Michelangelo on Sistine Chapel ceiling 
authors:
  - mihajlija
description: |
    Learn about rel=preconnect and rel=dns-prefetch resource hints and how to use them.
tags:
  - post
  - performance
  - fast
---

Before the browser can request a resource from a server, it must establish a connection. Establishing a secure connection involves three steps:

* Look up the domain name and resolve it to an IP address.

* Set up a connection to the server.

* Encrypt the connection for security.

> In each of these steps the browser sends a piece of data to a server and the server sends back a response. That journey, from origin to destination and back, is called a [round trip](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Round_Trip_Time_(RTT)). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In each of these steps the browser sends a piece of data to a server, and the server sends back a response. That journey, from origin to destination and back, is called a [round trip](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Round_Trip_Time_(RTT)). 
```

Depending on network conditions, a single round trip might take a significant amount of time. The connection setup process might involve up to three round trips—and more in unoptimized cases. 

> Taking care of all that ahead of time makes applications feel much faster. This post explains how to achieve that with two resource hints: `<rel=preconnect>` and `<rel=dns-prefetch>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taking care of all that ahead of time makes applications feel much faster. This post explains how to achieve that with two resource hints: `<link rel=preconnect>` and `<link rel=dns-prefetch>`.
```
Following the convention here: https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/resource-prioritization

## Establish early connections with `rel=preconnect`

Modern browsers [try their best to anticipate](https://www.igvita.com/posa/high-performance-networking-in-google-chrome/#tcp-pre-connect) what connections a page will need, but they cannot reliably predict them all. The good news is that you can give them a (resource 😉) hint.

Adding `rel=preconnect` to a `<link>` informs the browser that your page intends to establish a connection to another domain, and that you'd like the process to start as soon as possible. Resources will load more quickly because the setup process has already been completed by the time the browser requests them. 

> Resource hints are named so because they are not mandatory instructions. They provide the information about what you'd like to happen, but it's ultimately up to the browser to decide whether to execute them. Setting up and keeping a connection open is a lot of work, so the browser might choose to ignore resource hints or execute them partially depending on the situation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resource hints get their name because they are not mandatory instructions. They provide the information about what you'd like to happen, but it's ultimately up to the browser to decide whether to execute them. Setting up and keeping a connection open is a lot of work, so the browser might choose to ignore resource hints or execute them partially depending on the situation.
```
A little more idiomatic.

Informing the browser of your intention is as simple as adding a `<link>` tag to your page:

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com">
```

![A diagram showing how the download doesn't start for a while after the connection is established.](preconnect.png)

You can speed up the load time by 100–500 ms by establishing early connections to important third-party origins. These numbers might seem small, but they make a difference in how [users perceive web page performance](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rail#ux).

{% Aside %}

> chrome.com [improved Time To Interactive](https://twitter.com/addyosmani/status/1090874825286000640) by almost 1 s by pre-connecting to important origins. An e-commerce website [improved product image load time by 500 ms](https://andydavies.me/blog/2019/03/22/improving-perceived-performance-with-a-link-rel-equals-preconnect-http-header/) by pre-connecting to the image CDN.

Reviewer 2: I feel like a case study loses its effectiveness if we can't name the company that the case is about. Maybe consider cutting the second example?

{% endAside %}

> ## Use-cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Use-cases for `rel=preconnect`
```
A suggestion to make it clear what the section is about for selective readers.

### Knowing *where from*, but not *what* you're fetching

Due to versioned dependencies, you sometimes end up in a situation where you know you'll be requesting a resource from a particular CDN, but not the exact path for it. 

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--center">
<img src="versioned-url.png" style="max-width:450px" alt="A url of a script with the version name.">

> <figcaption>An example of a versioned URL</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<figcaption>An example of a versioned URL.</figcaption>
```
Per the handbook, figcaptions get terminal punctuation.

</figure>

The other common case is loading images from an [image CDN](/image-cdns), where the exact path for an image depends on media queries or runtime feature checks on the user's browser.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--center">
<img src="image-cdn-url.png" alt="An image CDN URL with the parameters size=300x400 and quality=auto.">

> <figcaption>An example of an image CDN URL</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<figcaption>An example of an image CDN URL.</figcaption>
```

</figure>

> In these situations, if the resource you'll be fetching is important, you want to save as much time as possible by pre-connecting to the server. The browser won't download the file before it needs it (that is, once the request is made from your page somehow), but at least it can handle the connection aspects ahead of time, saving the user from waiting for several round trips.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In these situations, if the resource you'll be fetching is important, you want to save as much time as possible by pre-connecting to the server. The browser won't download the file until your page requests it, but at least it can handle the connection aspects ahead of time, saving the user from waiting for several round trips.
```
I had a little trouble parsing the aside on the first read, so tried to simplify.

### Streaming media

Another example where you may want to save some time in the connection phase, but not necessarily start retrieving content right away, is when streaming media from a different origin.

Depending on how your page handles the streamed content, you may want to wait until your scripts have loaded and are ready to process the stream. Pre-connecting helps you cut the waiting time to a single round trip once you're ready to start fetching.

## How to implement `rel=preconnect`

One way of initiating a `preconnect` is adding a `<link>` tag to the `<head>` of the document.

```html
<head>
    <link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com">
</head>
```

Pre-connecting is only effective for domains other than the origin domain, so you shouldn't use it for your site. 

{% Aside 'caution' %}

> Only pre-connect to critical origins you will use soon because if the connection isn't used within 10 seconds the browser closes it. There's a limit to the number of simultaneous connections a browser can handle (for example, Chrome can handle six), and unnecessary pre-connecting can delay other important resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only pre-connect to critical origins you will use soon. If the connection isn't used within 10 seconds, the browser closes it. There's a limit to the number of simultaneous connections a browser can handle. (For example, Chrome can handle six.) Unnecessary pre-connecting can delay other important resources.
```
Breaking up the long sentences to improve accessibility.

{% endAside %}

You can also initiate a preconnect via the [`Link` HTTP header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Link):

`Link: <https://example.com/>; rel=preconnect`

{% Aside %}

> A benefit of specifying a preconnect hint in the HTTP header is that it doesn't rely on markup being parsed and it can be triggered by requests for stylesheets, scripts and more. For example, Google Fonts sends a `Link` header in the stylesheet response in order to pre-connect the domain that hosts the font files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A benefit of specifying a preconnect hint in the HTTP header is that it doesn't rely on markup being parsed, and it can be triggered by requests for stylesheets, scripts, and more. For example, Google Fonts sends a `Link` header in the stylesheet response to pre-connect to the domain that hosts the font files.
```
Comma between clauses, serial comma, idiomatic preposition.

{% endAside %}

> Some types of resources, such as fonts, are loaded in ["anonymous mode"](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-3/#font-fetching-requirements). For those you must set the `crossorigin` attribute with the `preconnect` hint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some types of resources, such as fonts, are loaded in [anonymous mode](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-fonts-3/#font-fetching-requirements). For those you must set the `crossorigin` attribute with the `preconnect` hint:
```
Periods go inside the closing quote except for literal strings. Not sure why the W3C puts quotes around _anonymous_ anyway, so I just removed them.

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://example.com/ComicSans" crossorigin>
```

If you omit the `crossorigin` attribute, the browser only performs the DNS lookup.

## Resolve domain name early with `rel=dns-prefetch`

You remember sites by their names, but servers remember them by IP addresses. This is why the domain name system (DNS) exists. The browser uses DNS to convert the site name to an IP address. This process — [domain name resolution](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2018/05/a-cartoon-intro-to-dns-over-https/)— is the first step in establishing a connection. 

> Because there's a limit to the number of connections a browser can open, you sometimes can't pre-connect to all your important domains. In that case use  `<link rel=dns-prefetch>` to save time on the first step—the DNS lookup which usually takes around [20-120 ms](https://www.keycdn.com/support/reduce-dns-lookups). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because there's a limit to the number of connections a browser can open, you sometimes can't pre-connect to all your important domains. In that case use  `<link rel=dns-prefetch>` to save time on the first step—the DNS lookup, which usually takes around [20–120 ms](https://www.keycdn.com/support/reduce-dns-lookups). 
```
Comma for the nonrestrictive modifier and en dash for the range.

> DNS resolution is initiated similarly to `preconnect`, by adding a `<link>` tag to the `<head>` of the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DNS resolution is initiated similarly to `preconnect`: by adding a `<link>` tag to the `<head>` of the document.
```

```html
<link rel="dns-prefetch" href="http://example.com">
```

[Browser support for `dns-prefetch`](https://caniuse.com/#search=dns-prefetch) is slightly different from [`preconnect` ](https://caniuse.com/#search=preconnect)[support](https://caniuse.com/#search=preconnect), so `dns-prefetch` can serve as a fallback for browsers that don't support `preconnect`. 

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="http://example.com">
<link rel="dns-prefetch" href="http://example.com">
```
{% Compare 'better' %}
To safely implement the fallback technique use separate link tags.
{% endCompare %}

```html
<link rel="preconnect dns-prefetch" href="http://example.com">
```
{% Compare 'worse' %}
Implementing `dns-prefetch` fallback in the same `<link>` tag causes a bug in Safari where `preconnect` gets cancelled.
{% endCompare %}

## Conclusion

> These two resource hints are helpful at improving page speed when you know you'll download something from a third-party domain soon, but you don't know the exact URL for the resource. Examples include CDNs that distribute JavaScript libraries, images or fonts. Be mindful of constraints, use `preconnect` only for the most important resources, rely on `dns-prefetch` for the rest, and always measure the impact in the real-world.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These two resource hints are helpful for improving page speed when you know you'll download something from a third-party domain soon, but you don't know the exact URL for the resource. Examples include CDNs that distribute JavaScript libraries, images or fonts. Be mindful of constraints, use `preconnect` only for the most important resources, rely on `dns-prefetch` for the rest, and always measure the impact in the real-world.
```
